Mutltitask Bert (#1268)
deepmipt/DeepPavlov: docs/features/models/multitask_bert.rst

At this page Multitask BERT usage is explained on a toy configuration file of a model which detects
insults, analyzes sentiment and recognises named entities. Multitask Bert configuration files for training
:config:`mt_bert_train_tutorial.json <tutorials/mt_bert/mt_bert_train_tutorial.json>` and for inference
:config:`mt_bert_inference_tutorial.json <tutorials/mt_bert/mt_bert_inference_tutorial.json>` are based on configs
:config:`insults_kaggle_bert.json <classifiers/insults_kaggle_bert.json>`,
:config:`sentiment_sst_multi_bert.json <classifiers/sentiment_sst_multi_bert.json>`,
:config:`ner_conll2003_bert.json <ner/ner_conll2003_bert.json>`.

We start with ``metadata`` field  of configuration file. Multitask Bert model is saved in
``{"MT_BERT_PATH": "{MODELS_PATH}/mt_bert"}``. Classes and tag vocabularies are saved in
``{"INSULTS_PATH": "{MT_BERT_PATH}/insults"}``, ``{"SENTIMENT_PATH": "{MT_BERT_PATH}/sentiment"}``. ``requirements``
field of Multitask BERT configuration file is identical to ``requirements`` fields of original configs. ``downloads``
field of Multitask BERT configuration file is a union of ``downloads`` fields of original configs without pretrained

> models. The ``metadata`` field of config is below

Reviewer: ```suggestion
models. The ``metadata`` field of config is below.
```

> 

Reviewer: this metadata field below is invisible in the html documentation

      },                                                                                                                  
      {                                                                                                                   
        "url": "http://files.deeppavlov.ai/deeppavlov_data/bert/cased_L-12_H-768_A-12.zip",                               
        "subdir": "{DOWNLOADS_PATH}/bert_models"                                                                          
      }                                                                                                                   
    ]                                                                                                                     
  }

Train config
------------

When using ``multitask_bert`` component you need **separate train and inference configuration files**.

Data reading and iteration is performed in ``multitask_reader`` and ``multitask_iterator``. These classes are composed
of task readers and iterators and generate batches which contain data from heterogeneous datasets.

> ``multitask_reader`` configuration has parameters ``class_name'``, ``data_path`` and ``tasks``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``multitask_reader`` configuration has parameters ``class_name``, ``data_path`` and ``tasks``.
```

``data_path`` field may have any string because data paths are passed for all tasks individually in ``tasks``
parameters. However, you can not drop ``data_path`` parameter because it is obligatory for dataset reader
configuration. ``tasks`` parameter is a dictionary of task dataset readers configurations. In configurations of

> task readers ``reader_class_name`` parameter is used instead of ``class_name``. The dataset reader configuration is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
task readers ``reader_class_name`` parameter is used instead of ``class_name``. The dataset reader configuration is provided
```

> below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
below:
```

.. code:: json

  {
    "dataset_reader": {
      "class_name": "multitask_reader",
      "data_path": "null",
      "tasks": {
        "insults": {
          "reader_class_name": "basic_classification_reader",
          "x": "Comment",
          "y": "Class",
          "data_path": "{DOWNLOADS_PATH}/insults_data"
        },
        "sentiment": {
          "reader_class_name": "basic_classification_reader",
          "x": "text",
          "y": "label",
          "data_path": "{DOWNLOADS_PATH}/yelp_review_full_csv",
          "train": "train.csv",
          "test": "test.csv",
          "header": null,
          "names": [
            "label",
            "text"
          ]
        },
        "ner": {
          "reader_class_name": "conll2003_reader",
          "data_path": "{DOWNLOADS_PATH}/conll2003/",
          "dataset_name": "conll2003",
          "provide_pos": false
        }
      }
    }
  }

``multitask_iterator`` configuration  has parameters ``class_name`` and ``tasks``. ``tasks`` is a dictionary of
configurations of task iterators. In configurations of task iterators ``iterator_class_name`` is used instead of

> ``class_name``. The dataset iterator configuration is below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``class_name``. The dataset iterator configuration is as follows.
```

          "seed": 42,
          "split_seed": 23,
          "field_to_split": "train",
          "split_fields": [
            "train",
            "valid"
          ],
          "split_proportions": [
            0.9,
            0.1
          ]
        },
        "ner": {"iterator_class_name": "data_learning_iterator"}
      }
    }
  }

Batches generated by ``multitask_iterator`` are tuples of two elements: inputs of the model and labels. Both inputs and
labels are lists of tuples. The inputs has following format: ``[(first_task_inputs[0], second_task_inputs[0], ...),
(first_task_inputs[1], second_task_inputs[1], ...), ...]`` where ``first_task_inputs``, ``second_task_inputs`` and so
on are x values of batches from task dataset iterators. Labels have the same format.

If task datasets have different sizes then smaller datasets are repeated until
their sizes are equal to the size of the largest dataset. For example, if the first task dataset inputs are
``[0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]``, the second task dataset inputs are ``[7, 8, 9]`` and batch size is ``2`` then multitask
input mini-batches are ``[(0, 7), (1, 8)]``, ``[(2, 9), (3, 7)]``, ``[(4, 8), (5, 9)]``, ``[(6, 7)]``.

> In this example there are 3 datasets. Considering the batch structure ``chainer`` inputs are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example there are 3 datasets. Considering the batch structure ``chainer`` inputs are:
```

.. code:: json

  {
    "in": ["x_insults", "x_sentiment", "x_ner"],
    "in_y": ["y_insults", "y_sentiment", "y_ner"]
  }

> Data preparation steps in pipe are similar to original configs except for names of the variables.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Data preparation steps in the pipe are similar to original configs except for names of the variables.
```

``multitask_bert`` component has parameters that are common for all tasks and task specific parameters. The latter
is provided inside ``tasks`` parameter. ``tasks`` is a dictionary which keys are task names and values are task

> specific parameters. **The names of tasks have to be similar in train and inference configs.**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
specific parameters. **The names of tasks have to be the same in train and inference configs.**
```

            "learning_rate": 1e-3,
            "one_hot_labels": true
          },
          "sentiment": {
            "class_name": "mt_bert_classification_task",
            "n_classes": "#classes_vocab_sentiment.len",
            "return_probas": true,
            "one_hot_labels": true,
            "keep_prob": 0.5,
            "learning_rate": 1e-3
          },
          "ner": {
            "class_name": "mt_bert_seq_tagging_task",
            "n_tags": "#tag_vocab.len",
            "return_probas": false,
            "keep_prob": 0.5,
            "learning_rate": 1e-3,
            "use_crf": true,
            "encoder_layer_ids": [-1]
          }
        },
        "in_distribution": {"insults": 1, "sentiment": 1, "ner": 3},
        "in": [
          "bert_features_insults",
          "bert_features_sentiment",
          "x_ner_subword_tok_ids",
          "ner_attention_mask",
          "ner_startofword_markers"],
        "in_y_distribution": {"insults": 1, "sentiment": 1, "ner": 1},
        "in_y": ["y_insults_onehot", "y_sentiment_onehot", "y_ner_ind"],
        "out": ["y_insults_pred_probas", "y_sentiment_pred_probas", "y_ner_pred_ind"]
      }

> For early you may need to design your own metric. Here are target metric is an average of AUC ROC for insults and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For early stopping you may need to design your own metric. Here are target metric is an average of AUC ROC for insults and
```

> sentiment tasks and F1 NER task. In order to add a metric to config the metric has to be registered. To register

Reviewer: ```suggestion
sentiment tasks and F1 for NER task. In order to add a metric to config the metric has to be registered. To register
```

> metric add decorator ``register_metric`` and run command ``python -m utils.prepare.registry``. The code below should

Reviewer: ```suggestion
metric add the decorator ``register_metric`` and run the command ``python -m utils.prepare.registry``. The code below should
```

> work if put in file ``deeppavlov/metrics/fmeasure.py``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
be placed in the file ``deeppavlov/metrics/fmeasure.py``.
```

        "load_path": "{MT_BERT_PATH}/model",
        "pretrained_bert": "{BERT_PATH}/bert_model.ckpt",
        "tasks": {
          "insults": {
            "class_name": "mt_bert_classification_task",
            "n_classes": "#classes_vocab_insults.len",
            "return_probas": true,
            "one_hot_labels": true
          },
          "sentiment": {
            "class_name": "mt_bert_classification_task",
            "n_classes": "#classes_vocab_sentiment.len",
            "return_probas": true,
            "one_hot_labels": true
          },
          "ner": {
            "class_name": "mt_bert_seq_tagging_task",
            "n_tags": "#tag_vocab.len",
            "return_probas": false,
            "use_crf": true,
            "encoder_layer_ids": [-1]
          }
        },
        "in": ["x_ner_subword_tok_ids", "ner_attention_mask", "ner_startofword_markers"],
        "out": ["y_ner_pred_ind"]
      }

``mtbert_reuser`` component is an interface to ``multitask_bert`` ``call`` method. To use ``mtbert_reuser`` provide it
with ``multitask_bert`` object, a list of task for inference (the format is same as in ``inference_task_names``

> parameter of ``multitask_bert``), and ``in_distribution`` parameter. Notice that tasks "insults" and "sentiment" are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
parameter of ``multitask_bert``), and ``in_distribution`` parameter. Notice that tasks "insults" and "sentiment"
```

are grouped into a list of 2 elements. Such s syntax invokes inference of these tasks in 1 call of ``tf.Session.run``.

> If ``task_names`` were equal to ``["insults", "sentiment"]``, the inference of the tasks would sequential and took

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If ``task_names`` were equal to ``["insults", "sentiment"]``, the inference of the tasks would be sequential and took
```

        },
        "ner": {"iterator_class_name": "data_learning_iterator"}
      }
    }
  }

Batches generated by ``multitask_iterator`` are tuples of two elements: inputs of the model and labels. Both inputs
and labels are lists of tuples. The inputs have following format: ``[(first_task_inputs[0], second_task_inputs[0],
...), (first_task_inputs[1], second_task_inputs[1], ...), ...]`` where ``first_task_inputs``, ``second_task_inputs``,
and so on are x values of batches from task dataset iterators. The labels in the have the similar format.

If task datasets have different sizes, then smaller datasets are repeated until
their sizes are equal to the size of the largest dataset. For example, if the first task dataset inputs are
``[0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]``, the second task dataset inputs are ``[7, 8, 9]``, and the batch size is ``2``, then
multi-task input mini-batches will be ``[(0, 7), (1, 8)]``, ``[(2, 9), (3, 7)]``, ``[(4, 8), (5, 9)]``, ``[(6, 7)]``.

In this tutorial, there are 3 datasets. Considering the batch structure, ``chainer`` inputs are

.. code:: json

  {
    "in": ["x_insults", "x_sentiment", "x_ner"],
    "in_y": ["y_insults", "y_sentiment", "y_ner"]
  }

> Sometimes a task dataset iterator returns inputs or labels consisting of more than elements. For example, in model

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sometimes a task dataset iterator returns inputs or labels consisting of more than one elements. For example, in model
```

          },
          "sentiment": {
            "class_name": "mt_bert_classification_task",
            "n_classes": "#classes_vocab_sentiment.len",
            "return_probas": true,
            "one_hot_labels": true
          },
          "ner": {
            "class_name": "mt_bert_seq_tagging_task",
            "n_tags": "#tag_vocab.len",
            "return_probas": false,
            "use_crf": true,
            "encoder_layer_ids": [-1]
          }
        },
        "in": ["x_ner_subword_tok_ids", "ner_attention_mask", "ner_startofword_markers"],
        "out": ["y_ner_pred_ind"]
      }

``mtbert_reuser`` component is an interface to ``call`` method of ``MultiTaskBert`` class. ``mtbert_reuser``
component is provided with ``multitask_bert`` component, a list of task names for inference ``task_names`` (the format
is same as in ``inference_task_names`` parameter of ``multitask_bert``), and ``in_distribution`` parameter. Notice
that tasks "insults" and "sentiment" are grouped into a list of 2 elements. This syntax invokes inference of these
tasks in one call of ``tf.Session.run``. If ``task_names`` were equal to ``["insults", "sentiment"]``, the inference

> of the tasks would be sequential and took approximately 2 times more time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of the tasks would be sequential and take approximately 2 times more time.
```

Author: Эта версия файла устарела. Я новую запушил.
